---
layout: post
title: the problem of gender: part I
published: true
usemathjax: true
tags: gender
---

> I originally published this on my substack [dinner guests](https://annhe.substack.com), and wanted to reserve this space for technical posts, but I just think this issue is so important, so here goes my honest philosophy on gender...

Those of you who know me know that I have a deeply rooted repulsion to nativist interpretations of “gender differences” between men and women. Why, you may ask, are you still talking about “men” and “women” in an age where men can become women and women can become men, when femininity is the new masculinity (thanks, Timothee Chalamet), and the view that gender and sexuality exist in uncountably infinite gradations is basically the mainstream?
I don’t know, because maybe that was a straw man question I made in simulation of what an internet troll would say to me? 
The reality is that I think that, as a society, we hardly understand the mechanisms of gender and sexuality in “men” and “women”, let alone for LGBTQ+ identities. It’s true, universities across the nation since at least the 1970s have established departments dedicated to making sense of the historical, biological, sociological, philosophical, and political dimensions of these questions. But I still walk around in liberal, libertine San Francisco met with comments overtly and covertly encoding the belief that “boys will be boys,” that women are _innately_ more emotionally intelligent or pro social, that women are unsuited to highly competitive and male-majority environments (because they cry if you criticize them, because they fall in love with you or you fall in love with them, because once they hit 30 they need to drop like flies and have children).
Those of you who know me know that I have expended nontrivial energy opposing public anti-feminists. (Back in 2017 I wrote a post on the flaws I saw in Damore’s Google Manifesto; in 2018 I showed up the Charles Murray’s talk at Stanford and asked him, to the shock of the conservative leaning audience in the Hoover auditorium, “why do you put so much weight on biological differences, when everyone knows that biology is highly malleable?”)
But I soon realized that it was a waste of time to engage with the likes of Charles Murray, who is very likely not interested in a good faith intellectual investigation of gender. 
The frightening thing to me, though, was beginning to understand that many people who aren’t right wing or extreme as Charles Murray or James Damore still exhibit _subconsciously_ the same biases. Even people who are fighting passionately to change culture to be more egalitarian, and even people who have a vested interest in this change, are still affected by accepting that, as Damore says, that women are more interested in empathizing over systematizing, are more neurotic and agreeable and gregarious (rather than aggressive), and that all of the these things make it harder for women to negotiate salary, speak up, and lead, without critically questioning what development and cultural events might lead to these observations. 
How can you design an intervention without having a deep model of the mechanism?
The big picture hypothesis is that the large of class of behaviors that we associate with “men,” which lead to overall greater agency and effectiveness in navigating the public world (in the Arendtian sense), are largely due to the minute-to-minute, day-to-day, interactions that boys, growing up, have with an environment that treats them differently, thereby creating the conditions for boys to mentally model the cause and effect of their actions in a way that diverges from girls. This is the “boys are encouraged to explore and play, getting hurt is ok,” and “girls are expected to be perfect” argument. 
The consequence of this is that by never having the freedom to fall down while attempting to climb a little too high on that tree, to come home covered in mud, or to tear apart a clock, girls are literally deprived of the experience of confidence-building and curiosity-enhancing activities. You don’t learn that falling down the tree today means successfully climbing it next week, and maybe one day free solo-ing El Capitan. When you are chastised or laughed at for these things, you associate exploratory behavior and acting from your intuition with danger, punishment, and disapproval from guardian figures who at that age represent All Moral Authority. That’s the mechanism. 
There’s a growing body of scientific literature connecting play with the healthy development of fluid intelligence, independent reasoning, and problem solving skills. Neopets, with its intricate simulation of the stock market, goods exchange, chance and luck, and its interactive world-wide reach, probably helped those millennials who became addicted to it, understand, to some extent, short and long strategy, and how to interface with a global community. Playing instruments, board games, hide-and-seek and other rough and tumble variants develop different skills. 
Of course, it’s way oversimplified to say that boys are all allowed to do whatever they want and girls are all forced to be prim and perfect ballerinas and play dress up with dolls, but this is the overall pattern we have. You also get different degrees of this depending on how your parents have conceptualized their own lives. 
The main point is that the curiosity and confidence encouraged by attitudes around proper play behavior of boys and girls is crucially important in developing a human that is confident in their own systematizing behaviors. This is what leads to a fluidity in manipulating and updating our mental models in a way that gives us greater agency in our lives. 
To delve a little deeper into the developmental psychology view, I ask of parents--how do you attune to and respond to your children? If they soil their clothes, is it ok? If they ask to try a new hobby, do you say yes? Do you kindly listen to them, even when they are incoherently babbling? Do you help them develop their own styles of reasoning?
But even outside of early development and home environments, problematic conditioning continues in the way “society” reinforces gender behavioral differences. 
One of the most fascinating social behaviors to observe is clique-like behavior in girls which starts as early as middle school. This is what you see in the movie Mean Girls. The A-list girl clique led by a bitter queen bee who dictates what color shirt you can wear on Wednesday, who you’re allowed to date, and even models self-loathing through ritualized body shaming. Yes, this happens. No, it is usually not this dramatic. In freshman year of college, there was a group of girls in my dorm who planned activities with each other all the time. They would invite me to their beach outings and nail salon sessions, but they would also try to suggest people for me to date who I had literally no interest in, and they would also try to tell me which of my behaviors were ok and which weren’t. (Needless to say, our friendship fizzled.)
In general, this is the behavior that people call “women fighting each other.”
It’s the overly critical mother, the pearls and white picket fence phenomena, Elena Richardson in Little Fires Everywhere and her perfect neighborhood where houses follow a preset palette and fines incur if you let your lawn overgrow. It’s dominance disguised as advice “for your own good.”
It’s giving up, it’s de facto validation of the patriarchy, to systematize in a way that you systematize your own oppression into the “facts of the world.”
Because how else are you going to survive?
This I see as the biggest problem to gender inequality. 
You pass down your own limiting, crystallized world views to younger generations of women.
It’s so hard to confront, because I can also see, deeply, why so many women are like this. When you’ve never been given the freedom to explore the depths of your humanity, your creative nature, your entrepreneurial desires, how can you encourage this in others? 
Elon Musk, in the most recent SNL, discussed his Asperger’s, joking that he can run human in simulation mode. In this day and age, still, I believe that women are being encouraged and conditioned into performing a deep masking of their true natures.
