---
layout: post
title: Transhumanism and Gender (The Problem of Gender Part II)
published: true
usemathjax: true
tags: gender
---
> The transhumanist vision of a profoundly transformed future humanity has attracted many supporters as well as critics from a wide range of perspectives. Transhumanism has been described by a proponent as the “movement that epitomizes the most daring, courageous, imaginative, and idealistic aspirations of humanity,” while according to a prominent critic, it is the world’s most dangerous idea. (from [here](https://transhumanism.fandom.com/wiki/Transhumanism))

Disclaimer: The positions expressed are taken for intellectual exploration. They do not necessarily reflect our personal beliefs nor those of our employers. I'll use the pseudonyms Alice, Bob, and Kat in place of our names.

**Alice**: Around this time last year, I started asking the question, “does the abolition of gender-based oppression imply the abolition of gender categories?”

<!--excerpt-->

While I don’t have coherent answers, I’m starting to wonder whether incremental progress is really the way to go with many of our societal issues, and how much risk there is in taking larger steps (in implementing the abolition of gender based oppression.)

In Waking Life, Eamonn Healy notes that biological, cultural, and anthropological progress occurs on a power scale. Our recent technology also grows accordingly.

As technological advances change our definition of human, we cannot avoid questioning what parts of ourselves to leave behind.

To the extent that identities and categories create suffering and hamper us from realizing our true intellectual, aesthetic, and moral potential, are we obligated to leave them behind?

Brave New World author Aldous Huxley would argue that transhumanism poses a threat to morality and democracy, which Simone de Beauvoir may potentially support in existential terms. For Beauvoir, humanity and the ethical ideal are grounded in subjective passion. By envisioning the future as open and contingent, artists and writers challenge the mystification that validate sacrificing the present for the future.

Do transhumanist solutions to gender oppression form a sufficiently ambiguous ethics?

**Bob**: Definitely haven't done the reading to answer your question well, but it raised a couple related ones for me. These might be too implementation-dependent to answer a good ethical question, so apologies if so.

Identity categories are used to oppress and to protect. What do legal instruments of protection (like anti-hate crime legislation or minority rights laws) look like without categories? Enforcement through the justice system is suboptimal, but laws do provide basis for recourse. How would transhumanism's technological advances replace things like, say, lawsuits over due process violations of Black students?

Relatedly, categories seem inescapable. Even if tech can suddenly eradicate existing biological bases of oppression, these impulses would morph into new forms and methods of discrimination. In turn, this requires a vocabulary to form a basis for protection. I don't know if/how transhumanist approaches avoid this.

Your post made me think of Paul Preciado’s book Testo Junkie - not a transhumanist, but a really interesting commentary on the interplay of biohacking and gender.

**Alice**: Thanks for the book rec. I feel that I have some questions about the role of law and government. To what extent will human nature be transformed so that protections against harms are less necessary, or take on a different form. That is, can we transition from a society based on dominance to one based on trust?

**Bob**: Big question. In theory, probably? In practice, seems unlikely that the most bigoted parts of society embrace the technological and cultural changes required for that transition. What's the incentive for fundamentally conservative social groups to change their ways?

**Alice**: Survival pressure? I feel that technology has the ability to get us out of equilibria configurations of society (like in a game theory way). But that seems ideologically not in line with trust.

**Bob**: Maybe, what does that look like? If the politicization of COVID showed anything lasting, it's that reactionary forces will cling to their way of life, even if there are threats to biological survival. Side note but when I think of "trustless" technology it's usually about tools to allow people to interact in trustless ways (e.g., zero-knowledge cryptography). I like this take on it.

**Alice**: To what extent do you think the politicization of COVID or reactionism is the result of short-horizon thinking? What is the psychological source for conservativism?

What do you think is the role of cryptography in transforming power and governance going forward?

**Bob**: All of the COVID stuff / rise of the alt right is clearly short horizon, but that’s because the longer horizon seems to clearly imply the death of fundamental parts of people’s life, like America being a majority minority country in a generation. I don’t know about the psychology behind conservatism as a Bay Area lifer, but globally, it does seem to correlate with decades of gutting education and under investment in basic infrastructure and jobs.

I don’t think it’s an intrinsic part of people’s lives, it’s definitely a function of exposure to different schools of thought. At higher levels (like the McConnells) of the world, it’s certainly about wealth attainment and power rather than ideology.

Role of cryptography in transforming power — hard to say. If UX around it improves, can probably make peer to peer transactions of various forms easier. Don’t see how it disrupts social governance structures just yet, I’m not one of those “everything will go on chain” BTC maximalists.

**Alice**: "At higher levels (like the McConnells) of the world, it’s certainly about wealth attainment and power rather than ideology" >> this is interesting! If we can exhibit external constraints on capitalism and wealth accumulation we can push back. Perhaps the accumulation of wealth is like a security-seeking mechanism? I wonder if we can shift humans to a perspective where the drive to security is inverted into a drive for creation. There's some drive for permanence and death-transcendence in wealth accumulation (in that it passes down your family). I wonder if this drive in liberals is geared more towards creating a future for the world-at-large

**Kat**: I think a trans human approach to gender is really interesting. We touched on it a bit in symsys classes because it begs the question of “what is a mind” and “is a mind gendered”. Usually this comes up when thinking about the singularity. 

I think generally it’s a really individual thing along the lines of culture and race and religion - how I identify (with my Jewish mother or Catholic father) is somewhat on a spectrum and gender is too. So everyone has their unique relationship with their own gender identity (they may think about it a lot or not at all but it probably differs from person to person.)

I think trans humanism philosophically moves us in a modern direction thinking about these things, but it’s sort of like how modern Phil and neuroscience don’t really have answers to pin down consciousness. I think gender is like consciousness in that regard, it’s “slippery” as most writers would say.
